content/en/blog/2025/08/25/bulletproof-ubuntu-desktop-vagrant-virtualbox/index.md, before:

---
title: "Getting a Bulletproof Desktop Environment with Vagrant and VirtualBox"
date: "2025-08-25"
description: "A battle-tested guide to Ubuntu 24.04 desktop VMs that actually work - with solutions for black screens, session failures, and auto-login issues"
tags:
  - ubuntu
  - vagrant
  - virtualbox
  - desktop
  - gnome
  - lightdm
---

_A battle-tested guide to Ubuntu 24.04 desktop VMs that actually work_

I'm trying to get back to writing. After a long break from blogging, I've been tinkering with Ubuntu desktop VMs and hitting the same frustrating issues that probably drove me away from desktop virtualization years ago. But this time I stuck with it, debugged the problems (with some help from Claude Code), and figured out what actually works.

## The Problem

Setting up a reliable Ubuntu desktop environment in VirtualBox is harder than it should be. Most tutorials leave you with:

- Black screens after reboot
- "Failed to start session" errors
- Display manager conflicts
- Auto-login that doesn't work
- Broken snap installations
- VM crashes during provisioning

After debugging countless failures, here's what actually works.

## The Solution: A Battle-Tested Approach

After countless failed attempts, here's what actually works:

- **Use LightDM instead of GDM3** - much more stable in VirtualBox
- **Install specific GNOME components** rather than bloated metapackages  
- **Get VirtualBox host settings right** - version, graphics, DNS
- **Protect essential packages** from apt's overzealous cleanup
- **Set proper environment variables** for reliable desktop sessions

The key insight: most tutorials focus on the happy path. Real reliability comes from handling all the ways things can break.

## VirtualBox Configuration

### 1. VirtualBox Version Matters

One subtle issue that caused me headaches: version mismatches between VirtualBox and Guest Additions. I originally had VirtualBox 7.0 from apt, but upgrading to the latest version (7.2) made VMs much more stable.

```bash
# Check your versions match
VBoxManage --version
# Should match the Guest Additions version in your VM

# If they don't match, update VirtualBox to latest from Oracle
# Download from: https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
```

The Guest Additions that come with older VirtualBox versions don't play well with newer kernels and desktop environments. Fresh installations matter more than you'd think.

### 2. VirtualBox Graphics and Performance Settings

The VirtualBox configuration matters as much as the Ubuntu setup. These settings improve performance and usability:

```ruby
# Graphics optimizations
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--vram=128"]           # More video memory
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--accelerate-3d=on"]   # Hardware acceleration  
v.customize ["setextradata", :id, "GUI/LastGuestSizeHint", "1280,720"]  # Default resolution

# Convenience features that actually work
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--clipboard", "bidirectional"]    # Copy/paste between host/guest
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--draganddrop", "bidirectional"]  # Drag files between systems

# Network performance
v.default_nic_type = "virtio"  # Faster than default network adapter
```

Without adequate VRAM, desktop effects fail and you get sluggish performance. The convenience features make the VM much more pleasant to use for actual work.

## Ubuntu Guest Configuration

The following sections contain bash commands that should go in your `config.vm.provision :shell, inline: <<-SHELL` block. These handle the Ubuntu-specific setup inside the VM.

### 3. Fix DNS Resolution First

I've had DNS resolution issues in VirtualBox VMs that break package installations and updates. The fix is to bypass systemd-resolved and use reliable DNS servers directly.

```bash
# Fix DNS resolution issues common in VirtualBox
systemctl stop systemd-resolved || true
systemctl disable systemd-resolved || true
systemctl mask systemd-resolved || true
chattr -i /etc/resolv.conf 2>/dev/null || true
rm -f /etc/resolv.conf
printf 'nameserver 8.8.8.8\nnameserver 1.1.1.1\n' > /etc/resolv.conf
chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf
```

### 4. Why GDM3 Fails in VirtualBox

GDM3 has constant issues in VirtualBox - crashes, black screens, and general instability. The problem is that GDM3 expects modern graphics drivers and hardware acceleration that VirtualBox's emulated graphics can't provide reliably. It also doesn't handle virtualized display management well.

LightDM is much more tolerant of virtualized environments and simpler graphics setups. After way too much debugging with GDM3, I switched to LightDM and never looked back.

```bash
# Disable GDM3 completely to prevent conflicts
systemctl stop gdm3 || true
systemctl disable gdm3 || true
systemctl mask gdm3 || true

# Set LightDM as default
echo '/usr/sbin/lightdm' > /etc/X11/default-display-manager
```

### 5. Set the Right Environment Variables

GNOME sessions can fail to start properly without the right environment variables. Set these early in the provisioning process:

```bash
# Critical environment variables for GNOME desktop
echo 'export DISPLAY=:0' >> /etc/environment
echo 'export XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=GNOME' >> /etc/environment  
echo 'export XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11' >> /etc/environment
```

These variables tell the desktop environment what display to use and what type of session to expect. Without them, you might get partial desktop loads or session failures.

### 6. Getting Auto-Login to Actually Work

Auto-login is trickier than it looks - the user needs to be in the `nopasswdlogin` group, which most tutorials conveniently forget to mention.

```bash
# Critical for auto-login to work
usermod -a -G nopasswdlogin vagrant

# LightDM configuration
cat > /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf << 'EOF'
[Seat:*]
autologin-user=vagrant
autologin-user-timeout=0
user-session=gnome
greeter-session=lightdm-gtk-greeter
EOF
```

### 7. The Missing Display Manager Symlink

Sometimes VMs boot to a console instead of a desktop. Usually it's a missing systemd service symlink that you need to create explicitly.

```bash
# This symlink is critical for boot-time startup
ln -sf /usr/lib/systemd/system/lightdm.service /etc/systemd/system/display-manager.service
systemctl enable display-manager.service
```


## Package Management Gotchas

These are the sneaky issues that will break your desktop environment after it's working. Also goes in your provisioning script.

### 8. The apt autoremove Gotcha

Here's one that will ruin your day: `apt autoremove` can remove essential desktop packages like gnome-session, leaving you with a broken desktop. You need to mark these packages as manually installed AND verify it actually worked.

```bash
# This will break your desktop session by removing gnome-session
# apt autoremove -y  # DON'T DO THIS without protection

# BETTER: Mark essential packages as manual first
apt-mark manual gnome-session gnome-session-bin gnome-session-common \
    lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

# CRITICAL: Verify it worked - fail fast if it didn't
protected_count=$(apt-mark showmanual | grep -E "(gnome-session|ubuntu-session|xdg-desktop-portal)" | wc -l)
if [ "$protected_count" -lt 6 ]; then
    echo "❌ MARKING FAILED! Only $protected_count/6 packages marked as manual"
    exit 1
fi

# Now autoremove is safe - it won't remove manually marked packages
apt autoremove -y
```

Desktop packages installed during VM provisioning aren't marked as "manually installed" by apt, so autoremove considers them candidates for removal when other packages that depended on them get uninstalled.

You must install ALL packages first, then mark them as manual. If you try to mark packages that don't exist yet, the protection silently fails. Always verify it worked immediately - silent failures will waste hours of debugging time later.

### 9. The Hidden fuse/fuse3 Conflict

After thinking I had the `apt autoremove` problem solved, I kept hitting the same desktop breakage. This one took me forever to figure out - it was actually a dependency conflict between `fuse` and `fuse3` packages during new package installations.

```bash
# This innocent-looking install can destroy your desktop
apt install -y fuse luarocks zsh shellcheck

# Output shows the horror:
# The following packages will be REMOVED:
#   gnome-session nautilus ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome
```

Desktop packages depend on `fuse3`, but some development tools try to install the older `fuse` package. This creates a dependency conflict that forces removal of essential desktop packages.

Use `libfuse2` instead of `fuse` where possible, or exclude `fuse` from basic package installations:

```bash
# Safe for AppImages and most tools
apt install -y libfuse2  # Instead of fuse

# Or exclude fuse from bulk installations
apt install -y git curl wget zsh shellcheck  # No fuse
```

Remember: `apt-mark manual` only protects against autoremove cleanup, not dependency-driven removals during new package installations.

## The Complete Vagrantfile

```ruby
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.box = "bento/ubuntu-24.04"
  config.vm.hostname = "desktop-playground"

  config.vm.provider :virtualbox do |v|
    v.gui = true
    v.cpus = 2
    v.memory = 4096

    # Graphics optimizations
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--vram=128"]
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--accelerate-3d=on"]
    v.customize ["setextradata", :id, "GUI/LastGuestSizeHint", "1280,720"]

    # Convenience features
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--clipboard", "bidirectional"]
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--draganddrop", "bidirectional"]

    # Network optimization
    v.default_nic_type = "virtio"
  end

  config.vm.provision :shell, inline: <<-SHELL
    set -euo pipefail

    # Fix DNS first
    systemctl stop systemd-resolved || true
    systemctl disable systemd-resolved || true
    systemctl mask systemd-resolved || true
    chattr -i /etc/resolv.conf 2>/dev/null || true
    rm -f /etc/resolv.conf
    printf 'nameserver 8.8.8.8\nnameserver 1.1.1.1\n' > /etc/resolv.conf
    chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf

    # Set environment variables
    echo 'export DISPLAY=:0' >> /etc/environment
    echo 'export XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=GNOME' >> /etc/environment
    echo 'export XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11' >> /etc/environment

    # Update packages
    export DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive
    apt-get update -qq

    # Install complete desktop environment (consolidated)
    apt-get install -y -qq \
      xorg \
      gnome-session \
      gnome-shell \
      gnome-terminal \
      nautilus \
      gnome-settings-daemon \
      gnome-control-center \
      lightdm \
      lightdm-gtk-greeter \
      ubuntu-session \
      xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

    # Disable GDM3 to prevent conflicts
    if systemctl is-active --quiet gdm3 || systemctl is-enabled --quiet gdm3 2>/dev/null; then
        systemctl stop gdm3 || true
        systemctl disable gdm3 || true
        systemctl mask gdm3 || true
    fi

    # Set LightDM as default
    echo '/usr/sbin/lightdm' > /etc/X11/default-display-manager

    # Configure auto-login
    usermod -a -G nopasswdlogin vagrant

    cat > /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf << 'EOF'
[Seat:*]
autologin-user=vagrant
autologin-user-timeout=0
user-session=gnome
greeter-session=lightdm-gtk-greeter
EOF

    # Enable services
    systemctl enable lightdm
    ln -sf /usr/lib/systemd/system/lightdm.service /etc/systemd/system/display-manager.service || true

    # Mark essential packages as manually installed (after installation)
    apt-mark manual gnome-session gnome-session-bin gnome-session-common lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

    # Verify it worked
    protected_count=$(apt-mark showmanual | grep -E "(gnome-session|ubuntu-session|xdg-desktop-portal)" | wc -l)
    if [ "$protected_count" -lt 6 ]; then
        echo "❌ MARKING FAILED! Only $protected_count/6 packages marked as manual"
        exit 1
    fi

    # Start LightDM
    systemctl start lightdm || true

    echo "✅ Desktop environment ready!"
  SHELL
end
```

## Testing Your Setup

```bash
# Start the VM
vagrant up

# Verify auto-login works
# You should see the desktop without entering a password

# Test session persistence
vagrant reload
# Desktop should come back automatically
```

## Troubleshooting

### Black Screen After Boot

Check if LightDM is running:

```bash
systemctl status lightdm
journalctl -u lightdm -n 20
```

### "Failed to Start Session"

Check if gnome-session is installed:

```bash
dpkg -l | grep gnome-session
ls -la /usr/share/xsessions/
```

### Auto-Login Not Working

Verify group membership:

```bash
groups vagrant | grep nopasswdlogin
```

## Why This Matters

A reliable desktop VM environment is essential for:

- Testing desktop applications safely
- Developing GUI tools without polluting your host system
- Creating reproducible development environments
- Training and demonstrations

These techniques have survived countless VM rebuilds and configuration management runs. They work because they address the real failure points, not just the happy path.

## Next Steps

With a solid desktop VM foundation, you can layer on:

- Configuration management (chezmoi, Ansible, etc.)
- Development tools and IDEs
- Custom themes and fonts
- Application-specific setup

But first, get the foundation right. Everything else builds on these fundamentals.

---

_This guide emerged from building chezmakase, a project I'm working on that I expect to open source soon. After debugging dozens of VM failures, these patterns proved bulletproof._

Commit message:

feat(blog): add Ubuntu desktop VM guide with Vagrant/VirtualBox
Comprehensive guide for setting up reliable Ubuntu 24.04 desktop VMs:

- VirtualBox version compatibility and graphics configuration
- DNS resolution fixes and environment variable setup
- LightDM vs GDM3 comparison for virtualized environments
- Auto-login configuration and display manager troubleshooting
- Package management gotchas (apt autoremove and fuse conflicts)
- Complete working Vagrantfile with all optimizations
- Troubleshooting section for common issues

Battle-tested solutions from real-world VM debugging experience.

content/en/blog/2025/08/25/bulletproof-ubuntu-desktop-vagrant-virtualbox/index.md, after:

---
title: "Getting a Bulletproof Desktop Environment with Vagrant and VirtualBox"
date: "2025-08-25"
description: "A battle-tested guide to Ubuntu 24.04 desktop VMs that actually work - with solutions for black screens, session failures, and auto-login issues"
tags:
  - ubuntu
  - vagrant
  - virtualbox
  - desktop
  - gnome
  - lightdm
---

_A battle-tested guide to Ubuntu 24.04 desktop VMs that actually work_

I'm trying to get back to writing. After a long break from blogging, I've been tinkering with Ubuntu desktop VMs and hitting the same frustrating issues that probably drove me away from desktop virtualization years ago. But this time I stuck with it, debugged the problems (with some help from Claude Code), and figured out what actually works.

## The Problem

Setting up a reliable Ubuntu desktop environment in VirtualBox is harder than it should be. Most tutorials leave you with:

- Black screens after reboot
- "Failed to start session" errors
- Display manager conflicts
- Auto-login that doesn't work
- Broken snap installations
- VM crashes during provisioning

After debugging countless failures, here's what worked for me.

## The Solution: A Battle-Tested Approach

- **Use LightDM instead of GDM3** - seems much more stable in VirtualBox in my experience
- **Install specific GNOME components** rather than bloated metapackages  
- **Get VirtualBox settings right** - version, graphics, DNS
- **Protect essential packages** from apt's overzealous cleanup
- **Set proper environment variables** for reliable desktop sessions

My key insight: most tutorials focus on the happy path. What I needed was to handle all the ways things break.

## VirtualBox Configuration

### 1. VirtualBox Version Matters

One subtle issue that caused me headaches: version mismatches between VirtualBox and Guest Additions. I originally had VirtualBox 7.0 from apt, but upgrading to the latest version (7.2) made VMs much more stable.

```bash
# Check your versions match
VBoxManage --version
# Should match the Guest Additions version in your VM

# If they don't match, update VirtualBox to latest from Oracle
# Download from: https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
```

In my experience, Guest Additions from older VirtualBox versions don't play well with newer kernels and desktop environments. Fresh installations matter more than you'd think.

### 2. VirtualBox Graphics and Performance Settings

I've found that VirtualBox configuration matters just as much as the Ubuntu setup. These settings improved performance and usability for me:

```ruby
# Graphics optimizations
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--vram=128"]           # More video memory
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--accelerate-3d=on"]   # Hardware acceleration  
v.customize ["setextradata", :id, "GUI/LastGuestSizeHint", "1280,720"]  # Default resolution

# Convenience features that actually work
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--clipboard", "bidirectional"]    # Copy/paste between host/guest
v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--draganddrop", "bidirectional"]  # Drag files between systems

# Network performance
v.default_nic_type = "virtio"  # Faster than default network adapter
```

In my testing, without adequate VRAM you'll get sluggish performance and failed desktop effects. The convenience features make the VM much more pleasant to use for actual work.

## Ubuntu Guest Configuration

The following sections contain bash commands that should go in your `config.vm.provision :shell, inline: <<-SHELL` block. These handle the Ubuntu-specific setup inside the VM.

### 3. Fix DNS Resolution First

I've had DNS resolution issues in VirtualBox VMs that break package installations and updates. The fix is to bypass systemd-resolved and use reliable DNS servers directly.

```bash
# Fix DNS resolution issues common in VirtualBox
systemctl stop systemd-resolved || true
systemctl disable systemd-resolved || true
systemctl mask systemd-resolved || true
chattr -i /etc/resolv.conf 2>/dev/null || true
rm -f /etc/resolv.conf
printf 'nameserver 8.8.8.8\nnameserver 1.1.1.1\n' > /etc/resolv.conf
chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf
```

### 4. Why GDM3 Fails in VirtualBox

I've had constant issues with GDM3 in VirtualBox - crashes, black screens, and general instability. My best guess is that GDM3 expects modern graphics drivers and hardware acceleration that VirtualBox's emulated graphics can't provide reliably.

LightDM seems much more tolerant of virtualized environments and simpler graphics setups. After way too much debugging with GDM3, I switched to LightDM and never looked back.

```bash
# Disable GDM3 completely to prevent conflicts
systemctl stop gdm3 || true
systemctl disable gdm3 || true
systemctl mask gdm3 || true

# Set LightDM as default
echo '/usr/sbin/lightdm' > /etc/X11/default-display-manager
```

### 5. Set the Right Environment Variables

I've found that GNOME sessions can fail to start without the right environment variables. Set these early in the provisioning process:

```bash
# Critical environment variables for GNOME desktop
echo 'export DISPLAY=:0' >> /etc/environment
echo 'export XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=GNOME' >> /etc/environment  
echo 'export XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11' >> /etc/environment
```

These tell the desktop environment what display to use and what kind of session to expect. Without them, I've seen partial desktop loads and session failures.

### 6. Getting Auto-Login to Actually Work

Auto-login is trickier than it looks - the user needs to be in the `nopasswdlogin` group, which most tutorials conveniently forget to mention.

```bash
# Critical for auto-login to work
usermod -a -G nopasswdlogin vagrant

# LightDM configuration
cat > /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf << 'EOF'
[Seat:*]
autologin-user=vagrant
autologin-user-timeout=0
user-session=gnome
greeter-session=lightdm-gtk-greeter
EOF
```

### 7. The Missing Display Manager Symlink

Sometimes VMs boot to a console instead of a desktop. Usually it's a missing systemd service symlink that you need to create explicitly.

```bash
# This symlink is critical for boot-time startup
ln -sf /usr/lib/systemd/system/lightdm.service /etc/systemd/system/display-manager.service
systemctl enable display-manager.service
```


## Package Management Gotchas

These are the sneaky issues that will break your desktop environment after it's working. Also goes in your provisioning script.

### 8. The apt autoremove Gotcha

Here's one that will ruin your day: `apt autoremove` can remove essential desktop packages like gnome-session, leaving you with a broken desktop. You need to mark these packages as manually installed AND verify it actually worked.

```bash
# This will break your desktop session by removing gnome-session
# apt autoremove -y  # DON'T DO THIS without protection

# BETTER: Mark essential packages as manual first
apt-mark manual gnome-session gnome-session-bin gnome-session-common \
    lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

# CRITICAL: Verify it worked - fail fast if it didn't
protected_count=$(apt-mark showmanual | grep -E "(gnome-session|ubuntu-session|xdg-desktop-portal)" | wc -l)
if [ "$protected_count" -lt 6 ]; then
    echo "❌ MARKING FAILED! Only $protected_count/6 packages marked as manual"
    exit 1
fi

# Now autoremove is safe - it won't remove manually marked packages
apt autoremove -y
```

Desktop packages installed during VM provisioning aren't marked as "manually installed" by apt, so autoremove considers them candidates for removal when other packages that depended on them get uninstalled.

The trick is to install ALL packages first, then mark them as manual. If you try to mark packages that don't exist yet, the protection silently fails. I always verify it worked immediately - silent failures will waste hours of debugging time later.

### 9. The Hidden fuse/fuse3 Conflict

After thinking I had the `apt autoremove` problem solved, I kept hitting the same desktop breakage. This one took me forever to figure out - it was actually a dependency conflict between `fuse` and `fuse3` packages during new package installations.

```bash
# This innocent-looking install can destroy your desktop
apt install -y fuse luarocks zsh shellcheck

# Output shows the horror:
# The following packages will be REMOVED:
#   gnome-session nautilus ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome
```

Turns out desktop packages depend on `fuse3`, but some development tools try to install the older `fuse` package. This creates a dependency conflict that forces removal of essential desktop packages.

Use `libfuse2` instead of `fuse` where possible, or exclude `fuse` from basic package installations:

```bash
# Safe for AppImages and most tools
apt install -y libfuse2  # Instead of fuse

# Or exclude fuse from bulk installations
apt install -y git curl wget zsh shellcheck  # No fuse
```

Remember: `apt-mark manual` only protects against autoremove cleanup, not dependency-driven removals during new package installations.

## The Complete Vagrantfile

```ruby
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.box = "bento/ubuntu-24.04"
  config.vm.hostname = "desktop-playground"

  config.vm.provider :virtualbox do |v|
    v.gui = true
    v.cpus = 2
    v.memory = 4096

    # Graphics optimizations
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--vram=128"]
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--accelerate-3d=on"]
    v.customize ["setextradata", :id, "GUI/LastGuestSizeHint", "1280,720"]

    # Convenience features
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--clipboard", "bidirectional"]
    v.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--draganddrop", "bidirectional"]

    # Network optimization
    v.default_nic_type = "virtio"
  end

  config.vm.provision :shell, inline: <<-SHELL
    set -euo pipefail

    # Fix DNS first
    systemctl stop systemd-resolved || true
    systemctl disable systemd-resolved || true
    systemctl mask systemd-resolved || true
    chattr -i /etc/resolv.conf 2>/dev/null || true
    rm -f /etc/resolv.conf
    printf 'nameserver 8.8.8.8\nnameserver 1.1.1.1\n' > /etc/resolv.conf
    chattr +i /etc/resolv.conf

    # Set environment variables
    echo 'export DISPLAY=:0' >> /etc/environment
    echo 'export XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP=GNOME' >> /etc/environment
    echo 'export XDG_SESSION_TYPE=x11' >> /etc/environment

    # Update packages
    export DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive
    apt-get update -qq

    # Install complete desktop environment (consolidated)
    apt-get install -y -qq \
      xorg \
      gnome-session \
      gnome-shell \
      gnome-terminal \
      nautilus \
      gnome-settings-daemon \
      gnome-control-center \
      lightdm \
      lightdm-gtk-greeter \
      ubuntu-session \
      xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

    # Disable GDM3 to prevent conflicts
    if systemctl is-active --quiet gdm3 || systemctl is-enabled --quiet gdm3 2>/dev/null; then
        systemctl stop gdm3 || true
        systemctl disable gdm3 || true
        systemctl mask gdm3 || true
    fi

    # Set LightDM as default
    echo '/usr/sbin/lightdm' > /etc/X11/default-display-manager

    # Configure auto-login
    usermod -a -G nopasswdlogin vagrant

    cat > /etc/lightdm/lightdm.conf << 'EOF'
[Seat:*]
autologin-user=vagrant
autologin-user-timeout=0
user-session=gnome
greeter-session=lightdm-gtk-greeter
EOF

    # Enable services
    systemctl enable lightdm
    ln -sf /usr/lib/systemd/system/lightdm.service /etc/systemd/system/display-manager.service || true

    # Mark essential packages as manually installed (after installation)
    apt-mark manual gnome-session gnome-session-bin gnome-session-common lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter ubuntu-session xdg-desktop-portal-gnome

    # Verify it worked
    protected_count=$(apt-mark showmanual | grep -E "(gnome-session|ubuntu-session|xdg-desktop-portal)" | wc -l)
    if [ "$protected_count" -lt 6 ]; then
        echo "❌ MARKING FAILED! Only $protected_count/6 packages marked as manual"
        exit 1
    fi

    # Start LightDM
    systemctl start lightdm || true

    echo "✅ Desktop environment ready!"
  SHELL
end
```

## Testing Your Setup

```bash
# Start the VM
vagrant up

# Verify auto-login works
# You should see the desktop without entering a password

# Test session persistence
vagrant reload
# Desktop should come back automatically
```

## Troubleshooting

### Black Screen After Boot

Check if LightDM is running:

```bash
systemctl status lightdm
journalctl -u lightdm -n 20
```

### "Failed to Start Session"

Check if gnome-session is installed:

```bash
dpkg -l | grep gnome-session
ls -la /usr/share/xsessions/
```

### Auto-Login Not Working

Verify group membership:

```bash
groups vagrant | grep nopasswdlogin
```

## Why This Matters

I needed a reliable desktop VM setup to test stuff before reformatting my machine. Previously I'd set up VMs by hand, which was a complete pain in the ass - inconsistent results, forgotten steps, and hours wasted getting the same environment working again.

Having a reproducible Vagrant setup means I can spin up clean test environments quickly and know they'll work the same way every time. Your use case might be different, but the stability principles probably apply.

These techniques have worked for me across countless VM rebuilds and configuration management runs. They seem to work because they address the real failure points, not just the happy path.

## Next Steps

With a solid desktop VM foundation, you can layer on:

- Configuration management (chezmoi, Ansible, etc.)
- Development tools and IDEs
- Custom themes and fonts
- Application-specific setup

But first, get the foundation right. At least that's been my experience - everything else builds on these fundamentals.

---

_This guide emerged from building chezmakase, a project I'm working on that I expect to open source soon. After debugging dozens of VM failures, these patterns have been bulletproof for me._
